Rag evaluation article - part 1 (#179)
superlinked/VectorHub: docs/use_cases/retrieval_augmented_generation_eval.md

<br>For RAG it can be restated as :

### If you can't retrieve it, you can't generate it!!

Our experience has taught us that it is better to evaluate each component in isolation.

As for different components of RAG viz. Information Retrieval - Context Augmentation - Response Generation , we classified challenges of RAG as below :

<img src=/assets/use_cases/retrieval_augmented_generation_eval/rag_challenges.png alt="Classification of Challenges of RAG Evaluation" data-size="100" />

For evaluation, we need metrics/methodology/frameworks that uses one or more
tools. The tools that you use should cover each component of RAG. Such coverage
ensures granular and thorough measurements.

Evaluation metrics can assess:

- Retrieval effectiveness
- Coherence of generated responses
- Relevance to the retrieved information.

<img src=/assets/use_cases/retrieval_augmented_generation_eval/rag_granular.jpg alt="Granular Levels of Evaluation of RAG" data-size="100" />

### Let's dive in !!

## Strategies for Evaluation

Now that we have defined different challenges and levels at which we can break down the RAG evaluation, let us zoom into the levels individually. 

### Model Evaluation 

> To evaluate our model, we start with this [Massive Text Embedding Benchmark](https://github.com/embeddings-benchmark/mteb#leaderboard). We want to ensure that

Reviewer: How about putting a direct link to the leaderboard?
https://huggingface.co/spaces/mteb/leaderboard

The benchmark shown above leverages different public/private datasets to evaluate and report on the different capabilities of individual models.
If you're working with specialized domains, you may want to put together a
specialized dataset to teach the model.

We could either leverage the results here (provided our model belongs to this list) or run relevant 'tasks' for our custom model (instructions provided in the link)

```python
import logging

from mteb import MTEB
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer

logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)

model_name = "average_word_embeddings_komninos"
model = SentenceTransformer(model_name)
evaluation = MTEB(task_langs=["en"])
evaluation.run(model, output_folder=f"results/{model_name}", eval_splits=["test"])

print("--DONE--")
```

### Data Ingestion Evaluation

We first validate the model, and train it on the language of our domain. 
We can then configure data ingestion into our semantic retrieval store aka vector store.
Various vector databases offer index configurations to influence and enhance the retrieval quality, based on the supported index types (Flat , LSH , HNSW and IVF).

> One such example here to improve HNSW [retrieval-quality]("https://qdrant.tech/documentation/tutorials/retrieval-quality/").

Reviewer: The link is not rendered correctly in the GitHub preview. Maybe the quotation marks should not be put around the URL?

To evaluate ingestion, we need to focus on related variables, such as:

* **Chunk size** - represents the size of each segment. This depends on the token limit of our embedding model. It also has a substantial impact on the contextual understanding of the data. That impacts the precision, recall, and relevancy of our results.

* **Chunk overlap** - represents the presence of overlapping information fragments in each segment. This helps with context retention of the information chunks but at the same time must be used with relevant strategies like deduplication, and content normalization to eradicate adverse effects.

* **Chunking/Text splitting strategy** - represents the process of data splitting and further treatment as mentioned above.

> A [utility]("https://chunkviz.up.railway.app/") like this seem useful to visualise your apparent chunks.

Reviewer: Again, the link doesn't render on GH preview. 

```suggestion
A [utility]("https://chunkviz.up.railway.app/") like this seems useful to visualise your apparent chunks.
```

- DCG and nDCG, which relates to their relevance, based on the inclusion or rank of documents in the results

The nature of semantic information retrieval poses a challenge at this stage, as the documents are retrieved beyond the keywords/synonyms/token enrichment-matching.

You can build a reference evaluation set, known as a [Golden Set]("https://www.luigisbox.com/search-glossary/golden-set/"). We could also leverage [T5 Model]("https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/t5") to generate a starter pack for evaluation.

The golden set is a fundamental component in information retrieval evaluation.
It helps in define characteristics of a reference standard to assess the performance, effectiveness, and relevance of a selected retrieval algorithm.
It provides a common ground for objective comparison and improvement of a retrieval process/algorithm.

### End-to-End Evaluation

An end-to-end evaluation covers the response generation of the question. It leverages the provided context through retrieved documents.

Evaluating the quality of responses produced by large language models can be a challenge due to various factors as described above. 

> By virtue of nature and design , the answers generated rely on diversity of response which makes it impossible to device a fixed metric or methodology that fits in all domains and use-cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By virtue of nature and design, the answers generated rely on a diversity of response which makes it impossible to devise a fixed metric or methodology that fits all domains and use-cases.
```

To address these difficulties, you may use a blend of existing metrics like the following scores: 

- [BLEU]("https://huggingface.co/spaces/evaluate-metric/bleu") 
- [ROUGE]("https://huggingface.co/spaces/evaluate-metric/rouge") 

You can then combine these score with LLM-based or human evaluation methods.
For more information, see this paper which provides great ideas to establish [Quality Criteria]("https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/server/api/core/bitstreams/c6a53998-09e3-4d17-91fd-c7416d51b250/content") for the same.

To summarize, you want to establish methods to automate evaluating similarity
and content overlap between generated response and reference summaries. You can
also leverage human evaluation to evaluate subjective information, such as context-relevance, novelty, and fluency.

You can also build a classified 'domain - questions' set based on question complexity (easy, medium, hard). It can give you an overall sense of the RAG performance.

> Nevertheless, it is a challenge to formulate a comprehensive set of metrics. It
> has to appraise he quality of responses from LLMs. It remains an ongoing and intricate issue in the context of natural language processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nevertheless, it is a challenge to formulate a comprehensive set of metrics. It
has to appraise the quality of responses from LLMs. It remains an ongoing and intricate issue in the context of natural language processing.
```

<!-- SEO: Retrieval augmented generation Evaluation - TODO Summary
 -->

# Evaluating Retrieval Augmented Generation

## Understanding Retrieval-Augmented Generation

<img src=/assets/use_cases/retrieval_augmented_generation_eval/rag_qdrant.jpg alt="Implementation of RAG using Qdrant as a vector database" data-size="100" />

**Disclaimer**:
The provided implementation serves as an example using  [Qdrant](https://qdrant.tech). Alternative Vector Databases are also available. To determine the most suitable Vector Database for your specific use case, please refer to the [Vector DB feature matrix](https://vdbs.superlinked.com/)

> **RAG** stands for **Retrieval Augmented Generation**, and it probably is the most useful application of large language models lately.

Reviewer 2: maybe link to building blocks instead of explaining RAG in the article? @robertdhayanturner

It is the technique that combines the strengths of both retrieval and generation models. The retrieval is usually based on dense vector search, in combination with a text generation model like GPT.

RAG has received significant attention due to its ability to enhance content generation by leveraging existing information effectively. 
Its capacity to amalgamate specific, relevant details from multiple sources and generate accurate and relevant content has a lot of potential in various domains like content creation, question & answer application, and information synthesis.

Read more: [here](https://hub.superlinked.com/retrieval-augmented-generation)

## Why do we need RAG?

RAG plays a crucial role to significantly enhance [vector search](https://qdrant.tech/documentation/overview/vector-search/) with the power of Large Language Model (LLM), enabling dynamic content generation based on the retrieved knowledge.

It proves invaluable for tasks requiring detailed, coherent explanations, summaries, or responses that transcend the explicit data stored in vectors. 

> While vector search efficiently finds similar items, RAG takes a step further, offering content synthesis and a deeper level of understanding.

Reviewer 2: I would also highlight that compared to just retrieving chunks and presenting them to the user, every answer can be unique and tailored to the exact query. Maybe it is there implicitly but I would I think state that explicitly.

Author: Done! Please review

It excels in providing contextually rich, informative, and human-like responses, making it an ideal solution for a comprehensive and versatile approach when integrated with vector search.

Your next step is to conduct feasibility studies and correlate the results with your business needs and value expectations.

## Evaluating Retrieval-Augmented Generation

Our experience scaling RAG from Proof-of-concept (POC) to production taught us
about the unknowns. The lesson is to improve and optimize your solution through evaluation.

### Why do you need to evaluate?

Evaluation is key. It distills a sense of Trust in your application,
which establishes reputation, and boosts team morale and confidence.
It also validates that your applications avoid common pitfalls.

As we know, LLMs can make mistakes!! 🙂

One problem is that the 'data' frequently changes. Evaluation helps ensure the results are consistent with user expectations.

> If you can't quantify it, you can't improve it!!

For RAG it can be restated as :

>If you can't retrieve it, you can't generate it!!

Our experience has taught us that it is better to evaluate each component in isolation.

> As for different components of RAG viz. Information Retrieval - Context Augmentation - Response Generation , we classified challenges of RAG as below :

Reviewer 2: is there parentheses missing?

Author: It would help if you could add a suggestion, may be?

Reviewer 2: I did not add because I am not sure what this sentence mean. Maybe 
```suggestion
As for different components of RAG (Information Retrieval - Context Augmentation - Response Generation), we classified challenges of RAG as below :
```

Author: ah viz. is a synonym for 'namely' and hence parenthesis wasn't needed.

Reviewer 2: I see, didn't know. the hyphen part is still odd but I'll leave this to @robertdhayanturner

<figure>
<img src=/assets/use_cases/retrieval_augmented_generation_eval/rag_challenges.jpg alt="Classification of Challenges of RAG Evaluation" data-size="100" />

> <figcaption align="center">Slide from RAG Evaluation Presentation mentions ['Lost in the Middle' problem](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03172)</figcaption>

Reviewer: I think it's impossible to put a markdown link in an HTML snippet as it's not rendered properly.

```suggestion
<figcaption align="center">Slide from RAG Evaluation Presentation mentions <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03172">'Lost in the Middle' problem</a></figcaption>
```

</figure>

For evaluation, we need metrics/methodology/frameworks that uses one or more
tools. The tools that you use should cover each component of RAG. Such coverage
ensures granular and thorough measurements.

Evaluation metrics can assess:

- Retrieval effectiveness
- Coherence of generated responses

> - Relevance to the retrieved information.

Author: I can think of rephrasing it if it isn't clear but what I meant to assert : 
Effectiveness being measure of efficiency and accuracy (recall)
and relevance being measure of meaningfulness and appropriateness wrt to query (precision / F1). 
I agree they are closely connected !

> - Relevance to the retrieved information.

Reviewer 2: Ahh, I see. That was not clear for me, maybe a bit more explicitly rephrasing that would be great!

<img src=/assets/use_cases/retrieval_augmented_generation_eval/rag_granular.jpg alt="Granular Levels of Evaluation of RAG" data-size="100" />

### Let's dive in !!

## Strategies for Evaluation

Now that we have defined different challenges and levels at which we can break down the RAG evaluation, let us zoom into the levels individually. 

### Model Evaluation 

To evaluate our model, we start with this [Massive Text Embedding Benchmark](https://huggingface.co/spaces/mteb/leaderboard). 
We want to ensure that the model can understand the data that we encode.
The benchmark shown above leverages different public/private datasets to evaluate and report on the different capabilities of individual models.

> If you're working with specialized domains, you may want to put together a specialized dataset to teach the model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're working with specialized domains, you may want to put together a specialized dataset to train the model.
```

We could either leverage the results here (provided our model belongs to this list) or run relevant 'tasks' for our custom model (instructions provided in the github [link](https://github.com/embeddings-benchmark/mteb#leaderboard))

```python
import logging

from mteb import MTEB
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer

logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)

model_name = "average_word_embeddings_komninos"
model = SentenceTransformer(model_name)
evaluation = MTEB(task_langs=["en"])
evaluation.run(model, output_folder=f"results/{model_name}", eval_splits=["test"])

print("--DONE--")
```

### Data Ingestion Evaluation

> We first validate the model, and train it on the language of our domain. 

Reviewer 2: This is basically the previous section, I don't really see the purpose of this sentence here like this. I'd rephrase this.

We can then configure data ingestion into our semantic retrieval store aka vector store.
Various vector databases offer index configurations to influence and enhance the retrieval quality, based on the supported index types (Flat , LSH , HNSW and IVF).

> One such example here to improve HNSW [retrieval-quality](https://qdrant.tech/documentation/tutorials/retrieval-quality/).

Reviewer 2: flagging this to point to building blocks @robertdhayanturner

> One such example here to improve HNSW [retrieval-quality](https://qdrant.tech/documentation/tutorials/retrieval-quality/).

Reviewer 2: HNSW is improving retrieval quality? It rather makes it quick for a very little performance cost, as far as I know. Or do I misunderstand the sentence?

To evaluate ingestion, we need to focus on related variables, such as:

> * **Chunk size** - represents the size of each segment. This depends on the token limit of our embedding model. It also has a substantial impact on the contextual understanding of the data. That impacts the precision, recall, and relevancy of our results.

Reviewer 2: It also controls the granularity of the information in the chunks. Depends a lot on what type of queries we expect.

* **Chunk overlap** - represents the presence of overlapping information fragments in each segment. This helps with context retention of the information chunks but at the same time must be used with relevant strategies like deduplication, and content normalization to eradicate adverse effects.

> * **Chunking/Text splitting strategy** - represents the process of data splitting and further treatment as mentioned above.

Reviewer 2: how is this different from chunk_size and chunk_overlap? I suppose you mean what constitute the base splits that are later merged into chunks, right?

Author: This was the basic idea behind it : https://js.langchain.com/docs/modules/data_connection/document_transformers/#types-of-text-splitters

Do you suggest I explicitly add a couple of examples to facilitate understanding?

Reviewer 2: I think I would make it more clear, that there are splits, which are merged to constitute chunks. And there are considerations when creating splits, and also when merging splits to arrive at chunks.

A [utility](https://chunkviz.up.railway.app/) like this seems useful to visualise your apparent chunks.

### Semantic Retrieval Evaluation

The next step is semantic retrieval evaluation. It puts the work you've done so far to a litmus test.

> Retrieval is the vital component of the RAG and its evaluation can be addressed as a classic information retrieval evaluation problem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Retrieval is a vital component of RAG and its evaluation can be addressed as a classic information retrieval evaluation problem.
```

You need to establish the expectations from the returned results. This can help
us to identify reference metrics and important parameters. Done correctly, it
helps us determine if the documents retrieved at this stage are relevant
results.

We have several existing metrics to guide and define our baseline:

- Precision and Recall or their combination F1 Score
- DCG and nDCG, which relates to their relevance, based on the inclusion or rank of documents in the results

> The nature of semantic information retrieval poses a challenge at this stage, as the documents are retrieved beyond the keywords/synonyms/token enrichment-matching.

Reviewer 2: I don't undestand this sentence, I guess readers won't either

Author: ```suggestion
At this stage, the challenge arises in semantic information retrieval, where documents are retrieved based on criteria extending beyond traditional keyword, synonym, or token-level enrichment matching
```

Author: Does this seem better?

Reviewer 2: Still feels a bit convoluted sentence but now I understand that it is about the bag-of-word(token) or semantic vector based representation of text :) This is I think fine by me!

The golden set is a fundamental component in information retrieval evaluation.
It helps in define characteristics of a reference standard to assess the performance, effectiveness, and relevance of a selected retrieval algorithm.
It provides a common ground for objective comparison and improvement of a retrieval process/algorithm.

### End-to-End Evaluation

An end-to-end evaluation covers the response generation of the question. It leverages the provided context through retrieved documents.

Evaluating the quality of responses produced by large language models can be a challenge due to various factors as described above. 

By virtue of nature and design, the answers generated rely on the diversity of response which makes it impossible to devise a fixed metric or methodology that fits all domains and use-cases.

To address these difficulties, you may use a blend of existing metrics like the following scores: 

- [BLEU](https://huggingface.co/spaces/evaluate-metric/bleu) 
- [ROUGE](https://huggingface.co/spaces/evaluate-metric/rouge) 

> You can then combine these score with LLM-based or human evaluation methods.

Reviewer 2: I think here it probably could be explained a little more that the best and kinda online really good evaluation method here is a human deciding whether the answer is good or not. That can be outsourced to a good quality LLM, like GPT-4.

For more information, see this paper which provides great ideas to establish [Quality Criteria](https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/server/api/core/bitstreams/c6a53998-09e3-4d17-91fd-c7416d51b250/content) for the same.

To summarize, you want to establish methods to automate evaluating similarity
and content overlap between generated response and reference summaries. You can

> also leverage human evaluation to evaluate subjective information, such as context-relevance, novelty, and fluency.

Reviewer 2: ahh, it is explained here, I would somehow rework this paragraph and the previous one together

### Model Evaluation 

To evaluate our model, we start with this [Massive Text Embedding Benchmark](https://huggingface.co/spaces/mteb/leaderboard). 
We want to ensure that the model can understand the data that we encode.
The benchmark shown above leverages different public/private datasets to evaluate and report on the different capabilities of individual models.
If you're working with specialized domains, you may want to put together a specialized dataset to train the model.

We could either leverage the results here (provided our model belongs to this list) or run relevant 'tasks' for our custom model (instructions provided in the github [link](https://github.com/embeddings-benchmark/mteb#leaderboard))

```python
import logging

from mteb import MTEB
from sentence_transformers import SentenceTransformer

logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)

model_name = "average_word_embeddings_komninos"
model = SentenceTransformer(model_name)
evaluation = MTEB(task_langs=["en"])
evaluation.run(model, output_folder=f"results/{model_name}", eval_splits=["test"])

print("--DONE--")
```

### Data Ingestion Evaluation

> We first validate the model, and train it on the language of our domain. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After we trained our model on the language of our domain,
```

> We can then configure data ingestion into our semantic retrieval store aka vector store.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we can then configure data ingestion into our semantic retrieval store aka vector store.
```
